[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SINGING)
When your road deserts you
and your feet disappear,
you'll find some orchards.
Wasted one, without appeal.
Where will you go from here?
>> Our mind literally
creates our body.
>> But it all
starts in the cell.
And who gives the
cells the order?
The orders come from the
neural net in our brains,
which are based on the
experiences and information
that we've lodged in there.
When we use a certain box
of solutions to our life,
that causes chemistry
to take place.
So in order for us to
change the chemistry,
we would literally
have to change
the neural net, which means we'd
have to change our identity.
Which means we'd have
to change our attitude
or change the way in which we
interact with our environment.
And every time we keep
being the same person
and keep experiencing the same
attitudes, all we're doing
is reinforcing ourselves
as our identity.
>> I once did a little gig in a
woman's prison of-- they're all
heroin addicts.
And by teaching them that they
have receptors for the heroin
and that the more
heroin that they take,
their ability to make their
own internal endorphins,
their own internal heroin
basically starts to decline.
And then their receptors
start to become sub-sensitive
or there's actually
less of them.
So there's these
actual changes and then
this new information
about how less brain
cells are being made.
So that people get, kind
of, in all addictions,
they get stuck in old patterns.
>> The person's mental life
becomes dominated by pain.
Such that everything
that they perceive
is colored by the pain.
And sometimes, every
way that they react
and everything that they do
becomes all about their pain.
>> One of the things about
receptors is they change
in their sensitivity.
If a given receptor for a
given drug or internal juice
is being bombarded for a long
time at a high intensity,
it will literally shrink up.
There will be less of them or it
will be cooked up in such a way
that it is desensitized
or down regulating.
So the same amount of
drug or internal juice
will elicit a much
smaller response.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If we're bombarding the
cell with the same attitude
and the same chemistry over and
over again on a daily basis,
when that cell finally
decides to divide,
when it produces a sister
cell or a daughter cell,
that next cell will have
more receptor sites for those
particular emotional neural
peptides and less receptor
sites for vitamins, minerals,
nutrients, fluid exchange,
or even the release of
waste products or toxins.
Now, all aging is a result of
improper protein production.
What happens when we age?
Our skin loses elasticity.
Well, elastin is a protein.
What happens to our enzymes?
We don't digest as well.
What happens to
our synovial fluid?
Those are proteins that
become brittle and stiff.
What happens to our bones?
They become thin.
So all aging is a result of
improper protein production.
So then the question
arises, does it really
matter what we eat?
And does nutrition
really have an effect
if the cell doesn't
even have the receptor
sites after 20 years
of emotional abuse
to even receive or let
in the nutrients that
are necessary for its health.
So if the muscle cells
making healthy muscle protein
and over years and years of
producing the same attitude
chemically, that cell starts
to produce the normal muscle
protein, but now in the sequence
is the amino acid sequence
of sadness.
That's not the same protein.
Because we know scientifically,
that if we alter the amino acid
sequence, we've
changed the protein.
So we have normal muscle
protein with the signal
of the attitude mixed in
with that particular protein.
And that's a cheaper
grade of protein.
It's a weaker protein.
And so if you look at the
human body when it ages,
it ages because the proteins
that we've produced once
when we were 16 or
17 years old are now
a cheaper grade of protein than
when we're 50 or 60 years old.
And who gives the orders for
the signaling from the brain
all the way to the receptor site
is our own personal attitude.
Now they'll tell you if you
read any scientific texts
that genetics causes diseases.
Genetics cause disease.
And then recently, science
now says, well, no.
It's not genetics
that causes disease.
It's the environment that
stimulates the genetics that
caused disease.
But what I'm saying is it's
our reaction to the environment
that stimulates the affects of
genetics that causes disease
in the human body.
So if we change
our attitude, that
means we're going to change
the effects neuro chemically,
which means we're
going to change
our effects biologically.
Which means we're
going to change
the effects of the
receptor site, which
means we're going to change
the expression of DNA.
Which means we're going
to change the expression
protein, which means
we're going to change
the expression of
life, which means
we're going to change the
health of the physical body.
So our attitude literally has
an effect on a cellular level.
>> There was a great
experiment done--
Stanford University,
I believe-- where
people were given the task
of eating something decadent.
I think, it was a
piece of chocolate cake
or perhaps, they chose what
the decadent thing was.
And the people who did it with
a sense of guilt and shame
actually experienced a transient
decrease in immune function.
Whereas, those who were able
to just enjoy the experience
and savor this wonderful
whatever that they
put in their mouths, actually
had a surge in immune status.
>> Capacity is in our
bodies to be coherent.
And thus, manifest higher and
higher energy density levels
and to be big time creators.
Just up to us.
We have the free will to
not do it or to do it.
And then it just takes
time and practice.
Just pumping iron.
>> Is it possible to
have mind over matter?
Baby, the brain is king.
The body is the kingdom.
Yes.
How long will that
take to happen?
Long enough for it to be the
mainstay of your personality.
To our very brain, those
great thunderstorms,
we have tapped yet a
third of its ability.
If we lived entirely, the
wholeness of our brain, which
would require the wholeness
of our DNA be activated,
we would become
the legends of old.
The immortals.
>> I really believe that the
body wants to heal itself
and the limits are in our own
minds of what we believe is
possible.
I think so much more is
possible then we appreciate.
>> Everyone's DNA, they use
less than a third of their DNA.
Did you know that there
are immortal genes?
Did you know that you
have immortal DNAs?
Did you know that
you have the DNA
to grow any part of
your body, to change it
any way you want to?
Did you know, you have
the DNA of humanity?
Did you know that you can turn
a predisposition of genetics
of blindness into a
predisposition of sight?
Did you know that
you can tap your DNA
to not only make you immortal,
but reverse your aging?
Your genes have that.
Yes they do.
It's what gene
fingerprinting is all about
in its infantile stages.
But it's embarrassing
when we really know it.
Because the great
question is, well,
if I have an immortal gene,
how come I'm not immortal?
Why [BLEEP] is it still there?
You can edit that
[BLEEP] out, if you wish.
>> Gotcha.
>> Or you can leave it in
according to the maturity
of the audience.
I'm certain I have said nothing
new under the sun, Horatio.
You know why?
Because you focus only on your
emotional means to an end.
So your DNA holds what
is replicant in you
to an experience.
You have never gone
outside of yourself
to create the
experience of yourself.
>> Here's how an intellectual
realization can change
your body.
A sudden new concept
creating an ah-ha
can classically translate
to nerve impulses
in the hypothalamus,
which then cause
various different
peptides to be released
from the pituitary gland,
which then circulate
through the bloodstream
and have the potential
to reach every cell in the body
where, by acting on receptors,
they can effect change.
And that's a classical view.
But I think there's another
view that can happen.
Not instead of,
but in addition to.
Our brain is constantly being
surveyed by little white cells,
which, for lack
of a better word,
we can call them cells
of the immune system.
But we're not sure how many
of these are stem cells.
And they're constantly
passing through.
And at the same time we have
this sudden realization,
we may imprint an
act and set off
a cascade of molecular changes
in these surveillance cells.
And then the
surveillance cell may
set up residence in
the brain and continue
to change the brain.
So it's not just that the
brain changes the body.
The thought process itself
changes the thought process.
What we think affects
what we will think later.
And what we believe
becomes true.
>> If we know the
thoughts of a person,
we will best know them
by their addiction.
Their continuous, over 24 hours,
in a continuum of what emotions
they display in their body,
we shall know their thoughts.
- I hate you.
>> We never ever reincarnate to
the I love you so much people.
We always reincarnate
to the situations
of why we hate ourself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- I hate you.
[SCREAM]
You idiot!
You're fat!
Look at you!
You're ugly!
You are worth nothing!
You're getting old!
I hate you!
>> What is the greatest
necromancer that haunts people,
that no one has given them
the permission to look at it
to become?
The hated, the despised, the
despicable, the fornicator,
the con artist, the
liar, the deceiver.
And yet, because it is so
depressed and suppressed,
it is the one faculty
that never became.
And that is closer to who we are
than the fictitious valentines
of love that we have collected
like old pages that are rotting
out of our book of life.
We can't even remember
who wrote them.
So just hate of self,
self-incrimination,
bring us nearer to a
vessel called truth?
Yes, it does.
Because it tells us
who we really are.
Because that's the
one aspect of our self
that we have never,
ever been able to adorn.
And unless we are
analogically become that,
we cannot succeed to the
throne of enlightenment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It makes you wonder.
Doesn't it?
Your thoughts can
do that to water.
Imagine what thoughts
can do to us.
>> The person who has another
urge inside of them that
they're clearly interested
in something else,
all they need is a
little bit of knowledge.
And if they accept that
knowledge as a possibility
and if they embrace that
knowledge over and over again,
sooner or later, they'll
begin to apply that knowledge.
Now for some people, it
may take five minutes.
And for other people to
take that first step may
take an enormous
amount of effort
because they have to weigh that
first step against everything
they know.
And everything they know
is attached to the way
their life is presently.
All their agreements,
all their relationships.
And to take that
first step means
that they have to
evaluate what it's
going to look like by taking
this step against what they
know.
And there's that battle
between those two elements.
But once we give
ourselves permission
to move outside the box, there's
a definite sense of relief,
and a definite sense of joy,
and a sense of understanding
that living in that mundane
repetitive routine life
is going to--
we can predict the outcome
of what that looks like.
And so, the more we do it,
the better we get at it.
>> There's data now, that when
people are addicted to whether
it's cocaine, heroin,
nicotine, alcohol,
all of them seem to share a
property of blocking the growth
of new brain cells.
And yet, it can
completely come back
when the drug-taking
has stopped.
>> In terms of possibilities, it
brings us back to that concept
where the system could go
in one direction or another.
And depending upon
where the person is,
and what their level
of emotional congruency
is, what the experience
of the system has been,
and what the current
state of the system
is what really govern if it goes
in direction A or direction B.
>> In general, the field of
psychiatry really doesn't allow
for enough freedom of
action on people's part.
Meaning an awful lot of
problems-- not all of them,
to be sure-- but a lot a
lot of problems that get
labeled as
psychological problems
really amount to people
making rotten choices.
And they ought to be instructed
to make different ones.
For example, let's say, somebody
is having a difficult time--
notorious problem--
completing a PhD thesis.
So they'll run to a psychologist
and will spend, maybe,
months and years in therapy.
Sort of, the Woody
Allen problem.
Because they've got
a big complicated
psychological neurosis.
And really, the problem
is that they're lazy.
And nobody has just
said you're just
making a series
of rotten choices
with how you're
spending your time
and nobody has
ever instructed you
in certain fundamental
virtues like self-discipline.
And when you get
up in the morning,
you have to make an intelligent
decision about how you're
going to spend your time.
>> People who make up
their mind about anything--
whether they're given a
prognosis of terminal cancer,
prognosis of a certain health
malady that's going to take
a certain amount of time--
the person who makes
up their mind--
and that is a great definition
of the frontal lobe--
when you make up your
mind about something,
you're overcoming the body.
You're overcoming
the enforcement
from the environment.
And you're overcoming time.
>> Oh, poopy.
>> If you don't see the traps,
you have to go through the crap
until you see the traps.
Because if you don't
see it, it's you're
only teaching machine.
It's your only way
for you to come
to understand something new.
So the universe brings
these things to your door.
And there is learning
in them for you,
if you are willing
to reflect upon them
and think beyond
the rigid mindset.
- Can I-- wow--
borrow some toothpaste?
>> When I talk about
we disappearing,
I don't mean that we
physically disappear.
What I mean is that we move out
of the area of the brain that
has to do with our personality.
That has to do with
our association
to people, our
association that places,
our association to things
and times and events.
We don't exist in the
associative centers
in our brain that
reaffirms our identity
and reaffirms our personality.
>> We now have science to back
up what our thoughts do and how
they make our bodies weak.
A lot of scientists who
are actually studying this
with behavioral
kinesiology and other ways,
showing that thoughts
make your body weak.
And thoughts, pretty
much, create your reality.
They create what you're
going to-- what you're
going to think about yourself.
If you're fat, but you
think you're wonderful,
you'll be wonderful.
But most women are--
we're compared all the time
with impossible images,
from Barbie to models.
And so we think that our
whole currency is how we look
and how other people are
going to perceive us.
And we're always up against
impossible standards.
>> What is relative to their own
emotional addiction are movies
and dramas and news
and all the media.
They're just so beautiful
today in providing people
with experiences without
having to be there.
And yet-- and yet--
that distance does not
define human greatness.
>> They're so hypnotized by
their environment through
the media, through television,
through people living
and creating ideals that
everybody struggles to become,
that no one can actually become
in terms of physical appearance
and definitions of beauty and
valor, that are all illusions.
That most people surrender and
live their life in mediocrity.
And they may live
that life and the soul
may never really-- their
desire may never really
rise to the surface so they
may want to be something else.
But if it does
rise to the surface
and they ask themselves,
if there is something more
or why am I here?
What is the purpose of life?
Where am I going?
What happens when I die?
And they start to
ask those questions,
they start to flirt and
interact with the perception
that they may be having
a nervous breakdown.
And, in reality,
what they're doing
is that their old
concepts of how
they viewed their life and
the world start to fall apart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> That's why very few
people make this journey.
Because it's deeply unsettling.
All of the molds that we have
lived by have to be broken.
And we have to liberate
ourselves in this way.
And sometimes, there's
an awkward period
between the comfort
that we knew before
and the real state
of comfort when
we are the lord of
our being, which
follows that interval of chaos.
Most people, when they
get into the chaos,
give up hope and go back to
the old, false securities.
They get to live
a reasonable life.
And they get to die
in some sort of peace.
But they haven't advanced
spiritually at all,
in that experiment
that we call the life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're in completely new
territory in our brain.
And because we're in
completely new territory,
we're rewiring the brain.
Literally reconnecting
to a new concept.
Then ultimately, it changes
us from the inside out.
If I change my mind,
will I change my choices?
If I change my choices,
will my life change?
Why can't I change?
What am I addicted to?
What will I lose that I'm
chemically attached to?
And what person, place,
thing time or event
that I'm chemically
attached to that I don't
want to lose because I
may have to experience
the chemical
withdrawal from that?
Hence, the human drama.
>> This life is but a
page in an enormous book,
in which we will
always be who we are.
But always with the inherent
needling of ambitious pursuit.
A pursuit that takes us
from the boring tedium
of self-reflection of
self-hate and to self-creation
of new dreams.
And we are ambitious gods.
>> There's a big paradigm
shift involved in the teachings
of Jesus, from the teachings
of the Old Testament.
For instance, in the
Sermon on the Mount,
he quoted Moses saying,
"an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a
tooth, but I say to you,
forgive your enemies.
And do good to
those who hate you."
In the teachings of Jesus, it
seems that thinking something
is the same as doing it.
So if I think of
murdering my neighbor,
but don't actually do
it, obviously, it's
different for the neighbor.
But for me, it's not different
in terms of human evolution.
And this is something
that's borne out
by the quantum understanding
of the world which
we're familiar with today.
That it's the heart
that governs all things.
And in the evolution or
the development of my self
that I am constructing--
so to speak-- internally, the
thought is what's paramount.
So I think in that respect, many
of the teachings and parables
of Jesus were touching on
something that we know now
to be eminently profound about
the nature of the reality we
live in.
And how the processes
of evolution
that we want to use for
spiritual development
actually function.
>> Part of what the
new paradigm is,
is the awareness that
the spiritual is real.
I mean, mainstream
medicine is the only system
of medicine in the entire
world that does not invoke
higher power and mystery.
It's the only one.
>> Well, I think the reason that
science hasn't really explored
these questions is twofold.
One is that there has been a
significant conflict, if you
will, between spirituality
or religion and science
over the last century, really.
Where people have
really come to look
at religion and
spirituality as, kind of,
this falsehood and as delusional
and in a very negative way,
from the scientific perspective.
And having nothing to do
with what science can show.
But I think what's happened
is that not only have people
realized that science
does have something
to say about spirituality.
And that we can
utilize science to help
us understand what the spiritual
sides are of human beings.
So that's one thing.
And the other thing is that
as our science gets better,
we're able to ask more
interesting and more complex
questions.
So 15, 20 years ago, we
couldn't ask a question about,
what goes on in the brain of
somebody when they meditate?
But now we have the
techniques and the ability
to explore that kind of issue.
So, on one hand, science
is developing to the point
where we are having the ability
to ask these kinds of very
complex questions about these
very unusual experiences
that people have.
But there's also a
realization that there
may be more to these experiences
than what we have typically
thought of.
And that science
and spirituality
may actually have something
to say about each other.
>> A very great
spiritual teacher, Jesus,
said in a long time ago,
kingdom of God is everywhere.
People don't see it.
It is everywhere.
It's not in our state
of consciousness.
Exists within us.
And that is what we
fundamentally are.
>> Descartes invented dualism
to avoid the problem between
the church and science.
And ever since, science
and spirituality
have been on separate paths.
And, in fact,
consciousness and science
were on separate paths
from much of this century
due to the behaviorists.
It's only been the last 20
years that consciousness
has come back into science.
Can spirituality come
back into science?
I think it can.
I think only recently
have we got a framework
to understand spirituality.
For example, this level of
the fundamental spacetime
geometry which can
include platonic values
of good, aesthetics, beauty,
pure truth, as well as feeling
emotion.
Plus, the fact that
it interconnects
all of our conscious entities
or proto-conscious entities
with other beings and
with the universe itself.
This interconnectedness,
this timelessness, I think,
is the beginning of a scientific
understanding of spirituality.
>> So what the scientists and
what the mystics are talking
about are not just
parallel realities.
They are really one and
the same investigation.
It's just that scientists have
been investigating the material
world and their spiritual
traditions have investigated
not only the material, but also
the vital, the mental, and even
the supramental--
the domain of love, justice.
These archetypes which Plato
investigated long, long time
ago, even in the West.
So that's the difference.
Now we have extended our
science to not only contain what
the scientists have
traditionally investigated--
the materials--
but also a mental, the
vital, and supramental,
and consciousness itself.
>> At a fundamental level that
is even difficult to observe,
there is one God self.
One God self that is all of us.
We grow from that.
The whole universe grew from it.
And each of the separate
personalities that appeared
have grown from it, with the
illusion that each one is
a separate individual.
But actually, we're
all from the same tree.
>> Entanglement is a new
idea because it's arising out
of science.
But the concept of
a connected universe
is as ancient as we know.
Like the fundamental
principles in Eastern
philosophy is that
everything is entangled.
But they didn't use those words.
But that's basically,
what the models
are from Eastern philosophy.
So we have that as a historical
basis for these kinds of ideas.
It's called words like
cosmic consciousness
or collective consciousness.
And the new part
is that science,
through very different
means, has encountered
this aspect of the world.
And is now beginning
fairly rapidly, actually,
to learn the nature of it.
>> Can you understand what
we're talking about here?
In terms of
religion, you cannot.
People often say to me
exactly what you said.
Can you tell me when I go home,
how my mother or my grandmother
can link this to
what she believes in?
You can't do it.
It's an entirely
different world view.
And I think Jesus put it
very well when he said,
you cannot put new wine
into old wine skins.
Because if you do,
the skins will break
and it will all be lost.
>> We are at the
end of the paradigm.
We're at the finite stage
of the sensual paradigm.
There is no more paradigm
to have in the census.
We can modify the paradigm
within the box of what's
already been created centrally.
But the borders are
at its extension.
>> It's a very weird
time right now.
Because East has met West.
There's a lot of
flowering of ideas.
And many of us who were asked
to grow up in one paradigm
have to switch to a new one.
And that is very tricky.
I, for myself,
personally, it's--
I can experience both paradigms.
Sometimes I experience a
beautiful blend of both.
And sometimes I just
get up to the new one,
fall back to the old.
I think that maybe we're
the only generation that's
going to have to suffer through
this because this movie's going
to spell it out for people.
Right?